okay today we are going to talk about
flows of wealth and how people get rich
okay so wealth, what it is, who owns it & how it
flows around the economy is something which
is almost not taught at all in university economics
courses and for that reason many economists don't
think about it very much this means that if you
understand it you can have an advantage over most
economists and you can understand the economy
much more clearly than a lot of economists think
um it's super important to understand it because
the wealth distribution has changed massively
in the last 20 years um I think that has really
dominated changes in the economy and understanding
the way that wealth moves around has basically
enabled me to predict better than economists
after the 2008 crisis and also
here in the covid19 crisis so
if you understand this you can understand what's
happening in the economy and what you need to
do basically to protect your family and your
financial interests so number one you need to
understand what wealth is, wealth is not income
whenever we talk about wealth on this channel
we're not talking about your job or your salary
we're talking about the assets that you own
wealth is about physical assets uh in this country
the UK and in most Western countries the largest
single form of wealth in terms of value is
residential property so I'm talking to you from
a flat that I own you're probably watching this
from a flat or apartment that you own or you rent
this country & this world is full of residential
properties they are all owned that's the single
biggest form of wealth um people are used
to this kind of wealth because most people
either own a property or aspire to one day own a
property it's a form of wealth that we understand
it's important to understand that residential
property is not the only form of wealth there
are other huge forms of wealth and if you want to
understand them just walk down your high street
and have a look around so I'm talking to you from
Canary Wharf just around the corner there's a ton
of massive skyscrapers full of offices those are
all owned if you go down the high street you'llsee
supermarkets, shopping centres, bars, restaurants
those are all owned as well if you go out into the
countryside you'll see farmland that's all owned
if you live in a part of the world that has factories
you'll see factories full of machinery that's
another big source of wealth natural resources
such as oil, coal, the windmills that produce our
energy these are all kinds of wealth so the world
is absolutely full of wealth one other big source
of wealth is debt so if you own your own property
there's a big chance that you are owning it with
a mortgage somebody owns your mortgage so if you
own a property worth half a million pounds with
a 400 000 pound mortgage effectively you only
own 20% of your property and other 80% is owned
by the person who lent you the money there's
also an enormous amount of government debt in
this country in the UK and many other countries
all of this debt is owed to somebody is owned by
somebody, debt is another massive form of wealth
so I want to cover words quickly because I think
sometimes words are used in a way that confuses
what wealth is, wealth is not income income is your
salary from your work wealth is about ownership
of assets. Capital/Assets these are all basically
interchangeable - Wealth, Capital, Assets these are
fixed assets property that you can own that's
wealth. money is not the same as wealth
money is one specific kind of wealth a lot of people
who are who are extremely rich don't have a huge
amount of money for very rich people money is
generally only a tiny percentage of their wealth
so that's it wealth is assets wealth isproperty
um I think for most ordinary people
because they struggle even to own just the home
that they live in they tend not to understand that
the world is full of wealth commercial wealth in
many cases that they generally don't own much of
so that moves us on to the next point
which is who owns the wealth and how
so there are lots of different forms of wealth
and I want to separate residential property from
commercial wealth and debt because the way
that these are owned are very different now
in this country the UK and in also the United
States, Europe, Australia, all of the places where
these these videos are watched we still have
a relatively large property owned middle class
by which I mean people who are not particularly
rich but they own the property that they live in
now that makes residential property quite
unusual because it's the only form of wealth
where a large amount of ordinary people
own a big chunk of the wealth that exists
when it comes to other wealth like commercial
property or debt; mortgage debt, government debt
those forms of wealth are overwhelmingly owned by
very rich people now we sometimes get comments on
the video saying well that's not true because
ordinary people do own commercial wealth for
example in their pension funds and that is
true if you have a pension your pension will
basically invest in owning corporations
which will often own commercial property
or it will own for example government debt if
you have a large amount of cash in the bank
your bank would essentially be owning forms of
debt for you like government debt but there's a
big difference in the sense that when it comes to
residential property a huge amount of is owned by
a normal people whereas when we look at commercial
property even though ordinary people do ownsome
through for example their pension fund it istiny
compared to the amount owned by the very rich
now very rich people what they will tend to have
is they'll have what's called a family office and
that's basically a small business which will
hire lawyers and accountants which basically
manages the ownership of assets um they will own
businesses, land, commercial property, huge amounts
of stocks and shares they will own debt and that
would all be managed for them so there's kind of
a split where residential property is often owned
by ordinary families although often through large
amounts of debt whereas all the other forms
of wealth; commercial wealth, corporations, debt
tend to be overwhelmingly owned by the rich
ok so that's the setup there's a huge amount of
wealth in the world; residential property,
commercial property, natural resources, land
but ordinary families are only really owning
the residential property the rest of the assets
a tiny bit is owned by ordinary families
through their pensions and the rest is
owned largely by the rich I want to talk about
the cash flows that this creates in society
so every single time you use an asset you use a
piece of wealth that you don't own you have to pay
some money to the owner of the asset the owner of
that wealth the most obvious example of this is if
you rent the property that you live in every month
you have to pay rent to the owner of that property
if you own the property that you live in
but with a mortgage every month you have
to pay the mortgage interest to the owner of the
mortgage but it goes beyond just property right
say you go to the hairdressers for your haircut
the money that you pay doesn't all go to the
guy that cut your hair some of it will go to the
person who owns the building that the hairdresser
is in some of it will go to the person who lent a
business loan so that hairdresser to get started
if you go to the supermarket and you buy food in
the supermarket most of the money that you pay to
buy that food will not go to the workers in the
supermarket some of it will go to the owners of
the land where that food was grown some of it
will go to the owners of the physical building
that the supermarket is in some of it will go
to the shareholders of the company the owners
of the supermarket company itself and this
extends to every single purchase that you make
when you go take a flight to go on holiday that
doesn't mainly go to the workers of the airline
it goes to the owners of the planes it goes to
the owners of the airports so every single time
you spend money you are giving a bit of money to
the owners of the wealth the owners of the assets
even when you pay your taxes a big chunk
of that is going to pay debt interest to the
people who lent money to the government so
even then a big chunk of the money that you're
paying is going to the owners of the wealth
now the reason this is important is because
in many cases the wealth that you're accessing
is wealth that you literally need to live it's
access to a property it's food it's electricity
energy basic transport so what this means is
in many cases your whole salary or a massive
chunkof it can go towards accessing the wealth
that you need to live so if you have a salary of
£30-40,000a year very easily £20-30,000 ofit
can end up going to the owners of the assets
that you need to live your life so this creates
a massive cash flow every single year you are
paying a big chunk of your salary to the owners of
the wealth on the flip side of it the people who
own the wealth are receiving a massive cash flow
from you every year so if we consider for example
Rishi Sunak who's worth estimated £700 million
he will receive about £2,000,000-£3,000,000 a year
in pure cash flows from the wealththat he owns
that means assets that he owns andwhen you
use them you have to pay him to use them
so we have this massive cash flow going on from
people who don't own wealth to people who own
huge amounts of wealth, what does that mean and
what does that create in terms of flows of wealth
itself? well again let's use our favourite man
ofthe moment Rishi Sunak he's receiving
£3 million a year every single year because ofthe
wealth that he owns from you from other ordinary
families now what will Rishi Sunak do with that
money now very wealthy people they don't generally
like to accumulate money when their pile of money
grows they like to diversify that into owning more
forms of wealth now in a strong economy with lots
of growth opportunities this isn't necessarily a
bad thing because they can use that money to make
new investments and create new forms of wealth
but when we have a weak economy with a weak
consumer companies aren't willing to grow and
that means wealthy people tend to use this very
large income to buy more of the existing wealth
so you can see this creates a troubling dynamic
right every year ordinary families go to work
they get their salary they give most of their
salary to the rich and the rich use that money
to buy the existing assets from ordinary families
that means that next year ordinary families have
less assets, rich families have more assets, which
means ordinary families give a larger amount of
cash to the rich which means they can use that
to buy even more assets from ordinary families
this can create a dangerous spiral where money
gets sucked away from ordinary families and
rich families accumulate money. the way that these
ordinary families tend to lose that world is that
the older generation sells the property to pay for
their retirement and the younger generation never
gets property now if you consider these ordinary
families from a generational perspective you can
see they're going from being property
owning to notproperty owning but the
older generation sees we got a property and
now we're sellingit to pay for our retirement
and the younger generation simply sees
wecan't afford to to get a property
it's important to ask you know where are
those properties going and in many cases
this is the manifestation of those flows of
cash from the ordinary families to the rich
the rich accumulate money they give that money to
their kids and then their kids buy the property
that your kids then cannot afford or in other
cases they lend the money which your kids then
have to borrow so what you see is this increase
in wealth inequality which is balancing those
flows of cash from ordinary families to the rich
is manifesting in two main ways which is number
1. a smaller percentage of ordinary families
being able to own properties and number
2. those who do get properties having to borrow much
more money from the rich to get it what this means
is that the Next Generation has to spend more
time renting and pay a large amount of interest
but both Generations if they look at themselves
in isolation they see themselves getting richer
over time but if they were to compare themselves
with their kids and their parents what you see is
ordinary families getting poorer generation after
generation after generation so this brings us to
the question of how do people get rich now I
think ordinary families and ordinary people
tend to think the best way to get rich is through
working and I am somebody who who did get rich
through working but the reality of the situation
is its almost impossible to get as rich through
working as you can ever get by simply compounding
wealth and getting more and more wealth over time
so if you are as rich as Rishi Sunak (700 million
pounds)you'll make every single year 3 to
4 million pounds something like that just for
getting out of bed that will then grow and you
will have more wealth the next year and it will
compound up I think it was Albert Einstein that
said compound interest is the greatest force
in the world or it's often attributed to him
but this is the way that it works rich people get
a huge amount of money from you for being rich
and then they use that money to then buy your
assets which means they get more money from you
which they can then use to buy from all of your
assets and over time you see wealth get sucked
out of the middle class bit by bit
in the forms of losing their homes
not being able to accumulate pensions and having
much larger amounts of debt now this was the
dynamic which I kind of recognised back in 2011
which enabled me to predict that basically our
economy would never recover because you could see
that ordinary families were losing more and more
and more wealth that means that they will not
be able to spend money that means that ordinary
businesses will fail that means that ordinary
people's wages will fall over time so I think once
you understand the flows of wealth you can see
that our middle class will shrink living standards
will shrink and the economy will continue to fail
and this is the realisation I had back in 2011
um and it was also the realisation I had in2020
when Covid happened because you could see
that the wealthy were going to get massively
more rich if you know the way that the rich
behave you will know they will use that money to
buy assets from middle class that would increase
inequality more and that will lead this spiral to
accelerate so when you look at the whole picture
what you can see is that that the situation
is basically phenomenally bleak because if
in the absence of any action being taken it has
become inevitable that ordinary families and the
existing middle class will over time lose all of
their assets and that will happen generationally
so it'll be difficult for you to see it as an
individual but if you compare yourself to your
parents and your kids and your grandkids you will
see each generation getting poorer over time and
that will lead inevitably to more and more falling
living standards um and we can see it we can see
happening now as inequality increases the rich get
richer ordinary families lose their assets and the
middle class becomes poorer that hits the economy
so I think if you look at the flows of wealth
you can understand really clearly that
things will inevitably get worse and worse
it's important to understand that most economists
do not look at this because it's simply not
included in economics degrees economists tend not
to look at the wealth distribution or understand who
has wealth which different groups have wealth
um and that means that they will probably not
understand this is going to happen before it's too
late um that is a very bleak message um but it's
important that you understand that is what's going
to happen um the rich will get richer because of
the large amounts of wealth flowing to them
and the middle class will disappear um
the reason it's important that you understand is
because number one you can try to protect yourself
um what can you do as individuals well the main
thing you can do is try and reduce your spending
as much as possible I understand that in many
cases that is not possible most people are already
at bare minimum and other cases that means giving
up you know the few luxuries you have in life um
that's not a message I want to send um but there
is an alternative you know we can try to prevent
this massive flow of wealth we can try and reverse
it I think it's important to understand if we
don't reverse that flow of wealth it is inevitable
that living standards will decline aggressively
in this country and in other countries around
the world so really we've got a choice either
start wealth flowing back from the rich
to ordinary families which would involve
get rid of tax loopholes, greater taxation of wealth
rather than income, focus taxation on the rich or
we have to accept basically the middle... the
middle class will disappear and a collapse into
broad poverty in this country the UK in Western
Europe in the US that is that is inevitable
um you know I'm a betting man I'm a trading man
I bet every year on what will happen um if you
understand the flows of wealth I think you know
basically with certainty there will be a collapse
into poverty um but at the same time the rich
will get massively richer so asset prices will
become very expensive that's been monetisable I
bet every year on on big increases in asset prices
um but but it will be a disaster basically so um
really I would encourage you to help us try and
stop this from happening because um I make money
betting on this year after year but um I probably
prefer if the disaster didn't happen because it
would be terrible for our society and for our kids
um and the only way to stop that is to um
basically force governments to raise tax on
the rich because if we don't do that things will
get worse and worse in many cases the government's
are controlled or in this case we have a prime
minister who directly is some of the richest
people in the world they're not going to do
our unless we make them do it so um we're
going to keep trying to push for a reduction in
inequality if we don't do that there will be
disastrous collapse in living standards
we don't want it to happen we don't think
you want that to happen either so
um yeah support us help grow the
channel and um yeah let's try and stop the
disaster before it gets any worse thank you
money currently is flowing from
the government to the rich leaving
government with big piles of debt and
the rich with big piles of money
theres 1 other thing they can do with that massive
amount of income; they can buy your mom's house